+++
title = "Advent of code 2024 - Day 1: Historian Hysteria"
author = ["Alva Seltmann"]
date = 2024-12-07T00:22:00+01:00
lastmod = 2024-12-22T01:44:41+01:00
tags = ["R"]
draft = false
creator = "Emacs 29.4 (Org mode 9.7.11 + ox-hugo)"
+++

<div class="ox-hugo-toc toc">

<div class="heading">Table of Contents</div>

- [Part 1: Locations](#part-1-locations)
- [Part 2: Similarities](#part-2-similarities)

</div>
<!--endtoc-->

I try to solve this year's **Advent of Code 2024** riddles in R. This is Day 1 - see <https:adventofcode.com/2024/day/1>


## Part 1: Locations {#part-1-locations}

<details>
<summary>Lets first read the task:</summary>
<div class="details">

> Throughout the Chief's office, the historically significant locations are listed
> not by name but by a unique number called the **location ID**. To make sure they
> don't miss anything, The Historians split into two groups, each searching the
> office and trying to create their own complete list of location IDs.
>
> There's just one problem: by holding the two lists up **side by side** (your
> puzzle input), it quickly becomes clear that the lists aren't very similar.
> Maybe you can help The Historians reconcile their lists?
>
> For example:

```text
3   4
4   3
2   5
1   3
3   9
3   3
```

> Maybe the lists are only off by a small amount! To find out, pair up the numbers
> and measure how far apart they are. Pair up the **smallest number in the left
> list** with the **smallest number in the right list**, then the **second-smallest
> left number** with the **second-smallest right number**, and so on.
>
> Within each pair, figure out **how far apart** the two numbers are; you'll need to
> **add up all of those distances**. For example, if you pair up a `3` from the left
> list with a `7` from the right list, the distance apart is `4`; if you pair up a
> `9` with a `3`, the distance apart is `6`.
>
> In the example list above, the pairs and distances would be as follows:
>
> -   The smallest number in the left list is `1`, and the smallest number in the
>     right list is `3`. The distance between them is **`2`**.
> -   The second-smallest number in the left list is `2`, and the second-smallest
>     number in the right list is another `3`. The distance between them is **`1`**.
> -   The third-smallest number in both lists is `3`, so the distance between them
>     is **`0`**.
> -   The next numbers to pair up are `3` and `4`, a distance of **`1`**.
> -   The fifth-smallest numbers in each list are `3` and `5`, a distance of **`2`**.
> -   Finally, the largest number in the left list is `4`, while the largest number
>     in the right list is `9`; these are a distance **`5`** apart.
>
> To find the **total distance** between the left list and the right list, add up
> the distances between all of the pairs you found. In the example above, this is
> `2 + 1 + 0 + 1 + 2 + 5`, a total distance of **`11`**!
>
> Your actual left and right lists contain many location IDs. **What is the total distance between your lists?**
</div>
</details>

My input file: [2024-12-01-1-aoc.txt](https://github.com/aseltmann/aseltmann.github.io-org-src/blob/main/data/2023-12-03-1-aoc.txt)

First, we read the data - the `fread` command from the `data.table` package is
more versatile than `read.delim` from `base` and directly reads the data as a
`data.table`, which has [some benefits](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/data.table/vignettes/datatable-intro.html).

```jupyter-R
data <- data.table::fread("2024-12-01-1-aoc.txt", header = FALSE)
head(data)
```

| V1          | V2          |
|-------------|-------------|
| &lt;int&gt; | &lt;int&gt; |
| 41226       | 69190       |
| 89318       | 10100       |
| 59419       | 23880       |
| 63157       | 20193       |
| 81510       | 22869       |
| 83942       | 63304       |

Now, the idea is to get the ordered versions of `V1` and `V2`.

```jupyter-R
v1 <- data[order(V1)]$V1
v2 <- data[order(V2)]$V2
head(v1)
```

1.  10188
2.  10314
3.  10319
4.  10348
5.  10408
6.  10668

Coming from Python, this syntax looks a bit odd. The documentation of
`data.table::setorder` helps:

```text
setorder (and setorderv) reorders the rows of a data.table based on the columns (and column
order) provided. It reorders the table by reference and is therefore very memory efficient.

Note that queries like x[order(.)] are optimised internally to use data.table's fast order.
```

So, `data[order(V1)]` is actually short for `data.table::setorder(data, V1)`.
Then, we extract the vector by name using the `$` operator, which allows to
extract elements by name.

```jupyter-R
head(data.table::setorder(data, V1)$V1)
```

1.  10188
2.  10314
3.  10319
4.  10348
5.  10408
6.  10668

The actual computation is just the sum of the absolute difference:

```jupyter-R
sum(abs(v1 - v2))
```

3574690


## Part 2: Similarities {#part-2-similarities}

<details>
<summary>Lets first read the task:</summary>
<div class="details">

> This time, you'll need to figure out exactly how often each number from the left
> list appears in the right list. Calculate a total **similarity score** by adding
> up each number in the left list after multiplying it by the number of times that
> number appears in the right list.
>
> Here are the same example lists again:

```text
3   4
4   3
2   5
1   3
3   9
3   3
```

> For these example lists, here is the process of finding the similarity score:
>
> -   The first number in the left list is `3`. It appears in the right list three
>     times, so the similarity score increases by `3 * 3 = 9`.
> -   The second number in the left list is `4`. It appears in the right list once,
>     so the similarity score increases by `4 * 1 = 4`.
> -   The third number in the left list is `2`. It does not appear in the right
>     list, so the similarity score does not increase (`2 * 0 = 0`).
> -   The fourth number, `1`, also does not appear in the right list.
> -   The fifth number, `3`, appears in the right list three times; the similarity
>     score increases by **`9`**.
> -   The last number, `3`, appears in the right list three times; the similarity
>     score again increases by **`9`**.
>
> So, for these example lists, the similarity score at the end of this process is
> **`31`** (`9 + 4 + 0 + 0 + 9 + 9`).
>
> Once again consider your left and right lists. **What is their similarity score?**
</div>
</details>

My idea here is simple - we first count the occurrences of `V2` to be able to
check `V1` against them. Here, applying the `table` command works like
`pandas.value_counts()` and achieves this. We convert the output to a
`data.frame` and assign the `V1` values as row names. Note: `table` converts the
values which are counted to string, e.g. `"10019"` instead of `10019`.

```jupyter-R
tab <- table(v2)
v2series <- data.frame(c(tab), row.names = names(tab))
head(v2series)
v2series["10019", ]
```

|       | c.tab.      |
|-------|-------------|
|       | &lt;int&gt; |
| 10019 | 1           |
| 10100 | 1           |
| 10206 | 1           |
| 10428 | 1           |
| 10645 | 1           |
| 10972 | 1           |

1

Now, we loop through `V1` and try to access the frequency in `V2` (by converting
to string first, via `as.character`). If nothing is found in `V2`, an `NA` value
is returned. For everything that is not NA, we compute the similarity score,
append it to a list, and sum in the end. Note: a list in R can not directly be
summed (I don't know why that is) - so we have to `unlist` first.

```jupyter-R
sim <- list()
for (num in v1) {
    myfreq <- v2series[as.character(num), ]
    if (!is.na(myfreq)) {
        score <- myfreq * num
        sim <- append(sim, score)
    }

}
sum(unlist(sim))
```

22565391
